The following is a conversation with James Gosling, the founder and lead designer behind
the Java programming language, which in many indices is the most popular programming language
in the world, or is always at least in the top two or three. We only had a limited time for
this conversation, but I'm sure we'll talk again several times in this podcast. Quick summary of
the sponsors, public goods, better help, and ExpressVPN. Please check out these sponsors in
the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that
Java is the language with which I first learned object oriented programming and with it, the art
and science of software engineering. Also early on in my undergraduate education, I took a course
on concurrent programming with Java. Looking back at that time, before I fell in love with Neon
Networks, the art of parallel computing was both algorithmically and philosophically fascinating
to me. The concept of a computer in my mind before then was something that does one thing at a time.
The idea that we could create an abstraction of parallelism where you could do many things at the
same time while still guaranteeing stability and correctness was beautiful. While some folks in
college took drugs to expand their mind, I took concurrent programming. If you enjoy this thing,
subscribe on YouTube, review it with 5,000 up a podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon,
or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and
no ads in the middle. I try to make these interesting, but I do give you timestamps,
so go ahead and skip, but please do check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description.
It's the best way to support this podcast. This show, sponsored by Public Goods,
the one stop shop for affordable, sustainable, healthy household products.
I take their fish oil and use their toothbrush, for example. Their products often have a minimalist
black and white design that I find to be just beautiful. Some people ask why I wear this black
suit and tie. There's a simplicity to it that to me focuses my mind on the most important bits
of every moment of every day, pulling only at the thread of the essential in all that life has
to throw at me. It's not about how I look, it's about how I feel. That's what design is to me,
creating an inner conscious experience, not an external look. Anyway, Public Goods plants one
tree for every order placed, which is kind of cool. Visit publicgoods.com slash Lex,
or use code Lex at checkout to get 15 bucks off your first order. This show is also sponsored by
BetterHelp, spelled H E L P help. Check it out at betterhelp.com slash Lex. They figure out what
you need and match you with a licensed professional therapist in under 48 hours. I chat with a person
on there and enjoy it. Of course, I also regularly talk to David Goggins these days, who is definitely
not a licensed professional therapist, but he does help me meet his and my demons and become
comfortable to exist in their presence. Everyone is different. But for me, I think suffering is
essential for creation, but you can suffer beautifully in a way that doesn't destroy you.
I think therapy can help in whatever form that therapy takes. And I do think that BetterHelp
is an option worth trying. They're easy, private, affordable and available worldwide. You can
communicate by text anytime and schedule weekly audio and video sessions. Check it out at betterhelp.com
slash Lex. This show is also sponsored by ExpressVPN. You can use it to unlock movies and shows
that are only available in other countries. I did this recently with Star Trek Discovery and
UK Netflix, mostly because I wonder what it's like to live in London. I'm thinking of moving from
Boston to a place where I can build the business I've always dreamed of building. London is probably
not in the top three, but top 10 for sure. The number one choice currently is Austin, for many
reasons that I'll probably speak to another time. San Francisco, unfortunately, dropped out from the
number one spot but is still in the running. If you have advice, let me know. Anyway, check out
ExpressVPN. It lets you change your location to almost 100 countries and it's super fast.
Go to expressvpn.com slash Lex pod to get an extra three months of ExpressVPN for free.
That's expressvpn.com slash Lex pod. And now here's my conversation with James Gosling.
I've read somewhere that the square root of two is your favorite irrational number.
I have no idea where that got started. Is there any truth to it? Is there anything in
mathematics or numbers that you find beautiful? Oh, well, there's lots of things in math that's
really beautiful. I used to consider myself really good at math and these days I consider
myself really bad at math. I never really had a thing for the square root of two,
but when I was a teenager, there was this book called The Dictionary of Curious and
Interesting Numbers, which for some reason I read through and damn near memorized the whole thing.
And I started this weird habit of when I was like filling out checks or paying for things
with credit cards, I would want to make the receipt add up to an interesting number.
Is there some numbers that stuck with you that just kind of make you feel good?
They all have a story. And fortunately, I've actually mostly forgotten all of them.
Are they so like 42? Well, yeah. I mean, 42 is pretty magical.
And then the irrationals. I mean, but is there a square root of two story in there somewhere?
How does that homework get started? Well, it's like the only number
that has destroyed a religion. Well, the Pythagoreans, they believed that all numbers
were perfect and you could represent anything as a rational number. And in that time period,
this proof came out that there was no rational fraction whose value was equal to the square
root of two. And that means nothing in this world is perfect, not even mathematics.
Well, it means that your definition of perfect was imperfect.
Well, then there's the Gatal incompleteness theorems in the 20th century that ruined it once again
for everybody. Yeah. Although Gertl's theorem,
the lesson I take from Gertl's theorem is not that there are things you can't know,
which is fundamentally what it says. But people want black and white answers. They want true or
false. But if you allow a three state logic that is true, false, or maybe, then life's good.
I feel like there's a parallel to modern political discourse in there somewhere.
But let me ask, with your early love or appreciation of the beauty of mathematics,
do you see a parallel between that world and the world of programming?
You know, programming is all about logical structure, understanding the patterns that come
out of computation, understanding sort of, I mean, it's often like the path through the
graph of possibilities to find a short route. Meaning like find a short program that gets the
job done kind of thing. But so then on the topic of irrational numbers, do you see programming?
You just painted it so cleanly. It's a little of this trajectory to find a nice little program.
But do you see it as fundamentally messy, maybe unlike mathematics?
I don't think of it as, I mean, you watch somebody who's good at math do math. And
often it's fairly messy. Sometimes it's kind of magical. When I was a grad student,
one of the students, his name was Jim Sacks, was, he had this reputation of being sort of a walking,
talking, human, theorem proving machine. And if you were having a hard problem with something,
you could just like accost him in the hall and say, Jim. And he would do this funny thing
where he would stand up straight, his eyes would kind of defocus. He'd go, just like something
in today's movies. And then he'd straighten up and say, N log N and walk away. And you'd go,
well, okay, so N log N is the answer. How did he get there? By which time he's down the hallway
somewhere? Yeah. It is just the oracle, the black box, it just gives you the answer.
Yeah. And then you have to figure out the path from the question to the answer.
I think in one of the videos I watched, you mentioned Don Knuth,
well, at least recommending his book is something people should read. But in terms of
you know, theoretical computer science, do you see something beautiful that has been inspiring to
you speaking of N log N in your work on programming languages that's in the whole world of algorithms
and complexity and, you know, these kinds of more formal mathematical things? Or did that not really
stick with you in your programming life? It did stick pretty clearly for me because
one of the things that I care about is being able to
sort of look at a piece of code and be able to prove to myself that it works.
And, you know, so for example, I find that I'm at odds with many of the people around me over
issues about like how you lay out a piece of software. So software engineers get really
cranky about how they format the documents that are the programs, you know, where they put new
lines and where they put, you know, the braces and all the rest of that. And I tend to go for
a style that's very dense. Minimize the white space.
Yeah. Well, to maximize the amount that I can see at once. So I like to be able to see a whole
function and to understand what it does rather than have to go scroll, scroll, scroll and remember.
Right? Yeah. I'm with you on that. Yeah. And people don't like that?
Yeah. I've had, you know, multiple times when engineering teams have staged what was
effectively an intervention. You know, where they invite me to a meeting and everybody's
arrived before me and they all look at me and say, James, about your coding style. I'm sort of an
odd person to be programming because I don't think very well verbally. I am just naturally a slow
reader. I'm what most people would call a visual thinker. So when you think about a program,
what do you see? I see pictures, right? So when I look at a piece of code on a piece of paper,
it very quickly gets transformed into a picture. And, you know, it's almost like a piece of machinery
with, you know, this connected to that and like these gears and different sizes. Yeah. I see them
more like that than I see the sort of verbal structure or the lexical structure of letters.
So then when you look at the program, that's why you want to see it all in the same place,
then you could just map it to something visual. Yeah. And just kind of like it leaps off the page
at me. Yeah. What are the inputs? What are the outputs? What the heck is this thing doing? Yeah.
Getting a whole vision of it. Can we go back into your memory, memory, long term memory access?
What's the first program you've ever written? I have no idea what the first one was. I mean,
I know the first machine that I learned to program on was a PDP8
at the University of Calgary. Do you remember the specs? Oh, yeah. So the thing had 4K of RAM.
Nice. 12 bit words. The clock rate was, it was about a third of a megahertz.
Oh, so you didn't even get to the M, okay. Yeah. So, you know, we're like 10,000 times faster
these days. And was this kind of like a super computer, like a serious computer for?
No, the PDP8i was the first thing that people were calling like mini computer. Got it.
They were sort of inexpensive enough that a university lab could maybe afford to buy one.
And was there time sharing, all that kind of stuff?
There actually was a time sharing OS for that. But it wasn't used really widely.
The machine that I learned on was one that was kind of hidden in the back corner of the
of the computer center. And it was bought as part of a project to do computer networking.
But they didn't actually use it very much. It was mostly just kind of sitting there.
And it was kind of sitting there. And I noticed it was just kind of sitting there.
And so, I started fooling around with it. And nobody seemed to mind. So, I just kept doing that.
I had a keyboard and like a monitor. Oh, this is way before monitors were common.
So, it was literally a Model 33 teletype with a paper tape reader.
Okay. So, the user interface wasn't very good. Yeah. It was the first computer ever built
with integrated circuits. But by integrated circuits, I mean that they would have like
10 or 12 transistors on one piece of silicon. Not the 10 or 12 billion that machines have today.
So, what did that I mean feel like if you remember those? I mean, did you have kind of
inklings of the magic of exponential kind of improvement of Moore's law of the potential
of the future that was at your fingertips kind of thing? Or was it just a cool?
Yeah. It was just a toy. You know, I had always like building stuff. But one of the problems
with building stuff is that you need to have parts. You know, you need to have pieces of wood
or wire or switches or stuff like that. And those all cost money. And here you could build
arbitrarily complicated things and I didn't need any physical materials. It required no money.
That's a good way to put programming. You're right. It's if you love building things.
It's completely accessible. You don't need anything. And anybody from anywhere could
just build something really cool. Yeah. Yeah. If you've got access to a computer,
you can build all kinds of crazy stuff. And when you were somebody like me who had like
really no money. And I mean, I remember just lusting after being able to buy like a transistor.
You know, and when I would do sort of electronics kind of projects, they were mostly made
done by like dumpster diving for trash. You know, and you know, one of my big halls was
discarded relay racks from the back of the phone company switching center.
Oh, nice. That was the big memorable treasure. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That was a really good one.
What do you use that for? I built a machine that played Tic Tac Toe.
Nice. Out of relays. Of course, the thing that was really hard
was that all the relays required a specific voltage. But getting a power supply that will
would do that voltage was pretty hard. And since I had a bunch of trashed television sets,
I had to sort of cobble together something that was wrong but worked. So I was actually
running these relays at 300 volts. And none of the electrical connections were like properly
sealed off. Surprised you survived that period of your life. Oh, for so many reasons. For so
many reasons. I mean, you know, you're, you know, it's pretty common for teenage geeks to discover,
oh, thermite, that's real easy to make. Yeah. Well, I'm glad you did. But do you remember the,
do you remember what program and Calgary that you wrote, anything that stands out? And what
language? Well, so mostly the, anything of any size was assembly code. And actually,
before I learned assembly code, there was this programming language on the PDP eight called
Focal Five. And Focal Five was kind of like a really stripped down Fortran. And I remember playing,
you know, building programs that did things like play Blackjack,
or Solitaire, or for some reason, or the things that I really liked were ones where they were
just like plotting graphs. So something with like a function or data, and then you plot it.
Yeah. Yeah, I did a bunches of those things and went, ooh, pretty pictures.
And so this would like print out, again, no monitors. Right. So it was like on a teletype.
Right. Yeah. So it's using something that's kind of like a typewriter.
And then using those two plot functions. So when I apologize to romanticize things, but
when did you first fall in love with programming? You know, what was the first programming language?
Like as a serious maybe software engineer, what are you thought this is a beautiful thing? I guess
I never really thought of any particular languages being like beautiful, because it was never really
about the language for me. It was about what you could do with it. And, you know, even today,
you know, people try to get me into arguments about particular forms of syntax or this or that.
And I'm like, who cares? You know, it's about what you can do, not how you spell the word.
And, you know, so back in those days, I learned like
PL1 and Fortran and Koval. And, you know, by the time that people were
willing to hire me to do stuff, you know, it was mostly assembly code and, you know,
PDP assembly code and Fortran code and control data assembly code for like the CDC 6400, which was
an early, I guess, supercomputer. Even though that supercomputer has less compute power than my phone
by a lot. And that was mostly, like I said, Fortran world. That said, you've also showed
appreciation for the greatest language ever that I think everyone agrees is Lisp.
Well, Lisp is definitely on my list of the greatest ones that have existed.
Is it at number one? Or, I mean, I mean, you know, the thing is that it's, you know,
you know, I wouldn't put it number one. No. Is it the parentheses? What do you
not love about Lisp? Well, I guess the number one thing to not love about it is so freaking
many parentheses. On the love thing is, you know, out of those tons of parentheses,
you actually get an interesting language structure. And I've always thought that
there was a friendlier version of Lisp hiding out there somewhere. But I've never really spent much
time thinking about it. But, you know, so like, like up the food chain for me,
then from Lisp is Simula, which a very small number of people have ever used.
But a lot of people, I think you had a huge influence, right? Yeah.
The programming, but in the Simula, I apologize if I'm wrong on this, but is that one of the
first functional languages? No, it was the first object oriented programming language.
Got it.
It's really where object oriented and languages sort of came together.
And it was also the language where co routines first showed up as a part of the language.
So you could have a programming style that was, you could think of it as sort of multi
threaded with a lot of parallelism. Really? There's ideas of parallelism in there?
Yeah. Yeah. So that was back, you know, so the first Simula spec was Simula 67.
For like 1967?
Yeah. Wow.
So it had co routines, which are almost threads. The thing about co routines is that they don't
have true concurrency, so you can get away without really complex locking. You can't
usually do co routines on the multi core machine. Or if you try to do co routines on the multi
core machine, you don't actually get to use the multiple cores. Either that or you know,
because you start then having to get into the universe of semaphores and locks and things
like that. But in terms of the style of programming, you could write code and think of it as being
multi threaded. The mental model was very much a multi threaded one. And all kinds of problems
you could approach very differently. To return to the world of Lisp for a brief moment,
at CMU, you wrote a version of Emacs that I think was very impactful in the history of Emacs.
What was your motivation for doing so? At that time, so that was in
like 85 or 86. I had been using Unix for a few years. And most of the editing was this tool
called ED, which was sort of an ancestor of VI. Is it a pretty good editor, not a good editor?
Well, if what you're using, if your input device is a teletype, it's pretty good.
It's certainly more humane than Tico, which was kind of the common thing in a lot of the deck
universe at the time. And Tico is called TK? Is that the? No, Tico, TECO, the text editor and
corrector. So many features. And the original Emacs came out as, so Emacs stands for editor macros.
And Tico had a way of writing macros. And so the original Emacs from MIT
sort of started out as a collection of macros for Tico. But then the Emacs style got popular
originally at MIT. And then people did a few other implementations of Emacs that were,
you know, the code base was entirely different, but it was sort of the philosophical style
of the original Emacs. What was the philosophy of Emacs? And by the way, were all the implementations
always in C? No. And how does Lisp fit into the picture? No, so the very first Emacs was written
as a bunch of macros for the Tico text editor. Wow, this is so interesting. And the macro language
for Tico was probably the most ridiculously obscure format. You know, if you just look at
a Tico program on a page, you think it was just random characters. It really looks like just line
noise. It's just kind of like latex or something. Oh, way worse than latex. Way, way worse than
latex. But if you use Tico a lot, which I did, the Tico was completely optimized for
touch typing at high speed. So there were no two character commands. Or there were a few, but
mostly they were just one character. So every character on the keyboard was a separate command.
And actually, every character on the keyboard was usually two or three commands because
you can shift and control and all of those things. It's just a way of very tightly encoding it.
And mostly what Emacs did was it made that visual. So one way to think of Tico is use Emacs
with your eyes closed, where you have to maintain a mental model of sort of a mental image of your
document. You have to go, okay, so the cursor is between the A and the E. And I want to exchange
those so I do these things. So it is almost exactly the Emacs command set. Well, it's roughly
the same as Emacs command set, but using Emacs with your eyes closed. So part of what Emacs added
to the whole thing was being able to visually see what you were editing in a form that matched your
document. And a lot of things changed in the command set. Because it was programmable,
it was really flexible. You could add new commands for all kinds of things. And then
people rewrote Emacs like multiple times in Lisp. There was one done at MIT for the Lisp machine.
There was one done for Multix. And one summer, I got a summer job to work on the Pascal compiler
for Multix. And that was actually the first time I used Emacs. To write the compilers. You worked
on compilers too. It's fascinating. Yeah, so I did a lot of work. I spent a really intense
three months working on this Pascal compiler, basically living in Emacs. And it was the one
written in Maclist by Bernie Greenberg. And I thought, wow, this is just a way better way to do
editing. And then I got back to CMU, where we had kind of one of everything. And two of a bunch
of things and four of a few things. And since I mostly worked in the Unix universe, and Unix
didn't have an Emacs, I decided that I needed to fix that problem. So I wrote this implementation of
Emacs in C, because at the time, C was really the only language that worked on Unix. And you
were comfortable with C as well, at that point? Yeah, at that time, I had done a lot of C coding.
This was in like 86. And it was running well enough for me to use it to edit itself within a
month or two. And then it kind of took over the university. And then it spread outside.
Yeah. And then it went outside the, and largely because Unix kind of took over the research
community on the ARPANET. And Emacs was kind of the best editor out there. It kind of took over.
There was actually a brief period where I actually had login IDs on every non military
host on the ARPANET. Because people would say, oh, can we install this? And I'd like,
well, yeah, but you'll need some help. The days when security wasn't... When nobody cared.
Nobody cared. Yeah. I mean, you can ask briefly, what were those early days of ARPANET and the
internet like? I mean, did you, again, sorry for the silly question, but could you have possibly
imagined that the internet would look like what it is today? Some of it is remarkably unchanged.
So one of the things that I noticed really early on when I was at Carnegie Mellon was that
a lot of social life became centered around the ARPANET. And so things like between email and
text messaging, because text messaging was a part of the ARPANET really early on. There were no
cell phones, but you're sitting at a terminal and you're typing stuff. So essentially email,
or what is... Well, it's just like a one line message, right? So... Oh, cool. It's like chat.
Like chat, right? So it's like sending a one line message to somebody, right?
And so pretty much everything from arranging lunch to going out on dates was all like
driven by social media, right? In the 80s. Easier than phone calls, yeah.
And my life had gotten to where I was living on social media from the early mid 80s.
And so when it sort of transformed into the internet and social media explodes,
I was kind of like, what's the big deal? It's just a scale thing. Right. The scale thing is
just astonishing. But the fundamentals in some ways... The fundamentals have hardly changed.
And the technologies behind the networking have changed significantly. The watershed moment of
you know, going from the ARPANET to the internet, and then people starting to just scale and scale
and scale. I mean, the scaling that happened in the early 90s and the way that so many vested
interests fought the internet. Oh, interesting. What was the... Oh, because you can't really
control the internet. Yeah, so fundamentally, the cable TV companies and broadcasters and phone
companies at the deepest fibers of their being, they hated the internet. But it was often kind of
a funny thing because... So think of a cable company, right? Most of the employees of a cable
company, their job is getting TV shows, movies, whatever out to their customers. They view their
business as serving their customers. But as you climb up the hierarchy in the cable companies,
that view shifts because really the business of the cable companies
had always been selling eyeballs to advertisers. Right. And that view of a cable company didn't
really dawn on most people who worked at the cable companies. But I had various dust ups with
various cable companies where you could see, in the stratified layers of the corporation,
that this view of the reason that you have cable TV is to capture eyeballs.
So they didn't see it that way. Well, so the people who... Most of the people who worked at
the phone company or at the cable companies, their view was that their job was getting delightful
content out to their customers. And their customers would pay for that. Higher up,
they viewed this as a way of attracting eyeballs to them. And then what they were really doing
was selling the eyeballs that were glued to their content to the advertisers.
To the advertisers, yeah. And so the internet was a competition in that sense.
Right. And so... They were right.
Well, yeah. I mean, there was one proposal that we sent, one detailed proposal that we
wrote up back at that sun in the early 90s that was essentially like,
look, with internet technologies, anybody can become provider of content. So you could be
distributing home movies to your parents or your cousins who are anywhere else. So anybody can
become a publisher. Wow. You were thinking about that already. Yeah. Yeah. That was like in the
early 90s. And we thought, this would be great. And the kind of content we were thinking about
at the time was like home movies, kids essays, stuff from grocery stores or a restaurant that
they could actually start sending information about. That's brilliant.
And the reaction of the cable companies was like, fuck no. Because then we're out of business.
What is it about companies that... Because they could have just... They could have been ahead of
that wave. They could have listened to that. And they could have... They didn't see a path to revenue.
You know, there's... Somewhere in there, there's a lesson for big companies, right?
To listen, to try to anticipate the renegade out there, out of the box,
people like yourself in the early days writing proposals about what this could possibly be.
Well, in that, it wasn't... If you're in a position where you're making
truckloads of money off of a particular business model, the whole thought of like
leaping the chasm, right? You can see, oh, new models that are more effective are emerging.
Right? So like digital cameras versus film cameras.
Why take the leap? Why take the leap? Because you're making so much money off of film.
In my past at Sun, one of our big customers was Kodak. And I ended up interacting with
folks from Kodak quite a lot. And they actually had a big digital camera research and digital
imaging business or bit development group. And they knew that you just look at the
at the trend lines and you look at the emerging quality of these digital cameras.
And you can just plot it on the graph. And it's like, sure, film is better today,
but digital is improving like this. The lines are going to cross. And the point at which the lines
cross is going to be a collapse in their business. And they could see that. They absolutely knew that.
The problem is that up to the point where they hit the wall, they were making truckloads of money.
And when they did the math, it never started to make sense for them to kind of lead the charge.
And part of the issues for a lot of companies for this kind of stuff is that if you're going to
leap over a chasm like that, like with Kodak going from film to digital, that's a transition
that's going to take a while. We had fights like this with people over smart cards. The smart
cards fights were just ludicrous. But that's where visionary leadership comes in, right?
Yeah, somebody needs to roll in and say, take the leap. Well, it's partly take the leap,
but it's also partly take the hit. Take the hit in the short term.
So you can draw the graphs you want that show that if we leap from here on our
present trajectory, we're doing this and there's a cliff. If we force ourselves into a transition
and we proactively do that, we can be on the next wave. But there will be a period when we're in a
trough. And pretty much always there ends up being a trough as you leap the chasm.
But the way that public companies work on this planet, they're reporting every quarter. And the
one thing that a CEO must never do is take a big hit over some quarter. And many of these transitions
involve a big hit for a period of time, one, two, three quarters. And so you get some companies.
And like Tesla and Amazon are really good examples of companies that take huge hits.
But they have the luxury of being able to ignore the stock market for a little while. And that's
not so true today, really. But in the early days of both of those companies,
they both did this thing of, I don't care about the quarterly reports. I care about how many
happy customers we have. And having as many happy customers as possible can often be
an enemy of the bottom line. Yeah. So how do they make that work? I mean,
Amazon operated the negative for a long time. It's like investing into the future.
Right. So Amazon and Google and Tesla and Facebook, a lot of those had what amounted to
patient money, often because there's like a charismatic central figure who has a really
large block of stock. And they can just make it so. So on that topic, maybe it's a little
small tangent, but you've gotten a chance to work with some pretty big leaders. What are your
thoughts about Tesla side Elon Musk leadership on the Amazon side, Jeff Bezos, all of these folks
with large amounts of stock and vision in their company. I mean, they're founders.
Either complete founders or early on folks. And Amazon have taken a lot of leaps.
And that probably at the time people would criticize as like, what is this bookstore thing?
Yeah. And Bezos had a vision and he had the ability to just follow it.
Lots of people have visions and the average vision is completely idiotic and you crash and burn.
The Silicon Valley crash and burn rate is pretty high. And they're not necessarily
crash and burn because they were dumb ideas, but often it's just timing and luck. And
you take companies like Tesla and really the original Tesla, sort of pre
Elon was kind of doing sort of okay, but he just drove them. And because he had a really
strong vision, he would make calls that were always mostly pretty good. I mean, the Model X
was kind of a goofball thing to do. But he did it boldly anyway. Like there's so many people
that just said like, there's so many people that oppose them on the Falconwind door,
like the door from the engineering perspective, those doors are ridiculous. It's like.
Yeah, they are a complete travesty. But they're exactly the symbol of what great leadership is,
which is like, you have a vision and you just go like.
If you're going to do something stupid, make it really stupid.
Yeah, and go all in. Yeah. And to must credit, he's a really sharp guy.
So going back in time a little bit to Steve Jobs. Steve Jobs was a similar sort of character who
had a strong vision and was really, really smart. And he wasn't smart about the technology parts of
things. But he was really sharp about the sort of human relationship between humans and objects.
But he was a jerk. Can we just linger on that a little bit? Like people say he's a jerk.
Is that a feature or a bug? Well, that's the question, right?
So you take people like Steve who was really hard on people. And so the question is,
was he really, was he needlessly hard on people or was he just making people reach to meet his vision?
And you could kind of spin it either way. Well, the results tell a story.
The whatever jerk ways he had, he made people often do the best work of their life.
Yeah. Yeah. And that was absolutely true. And I interviewed with him several times.
I did various negotiations with him. And even though kind of personally I liked him,
I could never work for him. Can you put into words the kind of tension that you feel would be
destructive as opposed to constructive? Oh, he'd yell at people. He'd call them names.
And you don't like that? No. No, I don't think you need to do that.
And I think there's pushing people to excel and then there's too far. And I think he was
on the wrong side of the line. And I've never worked for Musk. I know a number of people who have
many of them that have said, and it shows up in the press a lot, that Musk is kind of that way.
And one of the things that I sort of loathe about Silicon Valley these days is that
a lot of the high flying successes are run by people who are complete jerks.
But it seems like there's come this sort of mythology out of Steve Jobs that the reason
that he succeeded was because he was super hard on people. And in a number of corners, people
start going, oh, if I want to succeed, I need to be a real jerk. And that for me just does not
compute. I know a lot of successful people who are not jerks who are perfectly fine people. They
tend to not be in the public eye. The general public somehow lifts the jerks up into the
into the hero status. Right. Well, because they do things that get them in the press. And the
people who don't do the kind of things that spill into the press. Yeah, I just talked to Chris
Ladner for the second time. He's a super nice guy. Just an example of this kind of kind of
individual that's in the background. I feel like he's behind a million technologies. But he also
talked about the jerkiness of some of the folks. Yeah. Yeah. And the fact that being a jerk has
become your required style. But one thing I maybe want to ask on that is maybe to push back a little
bit. So there's the jerk side. But there's also, if I were to criticize what I've seen
us in the Bound Valley, which is almost the resistance to working hard. So on the jerking
aside, it's so postage jobs and Elon kind of pushed people to work really hard to do.
And it's a question whether it's possible to do that nicely. But one of the things that
bothers me, maybe I'm just Russian and just kind of romanticize the whole suffering thing.
But I think working hard is essential for accomplishing anything interesting,
like really hard. And in the parlance of Silicon Valley, it's probably too hard. This idea of
that you should work smart, not hard. Often, to me, sounds like you should be lazy. Because of
course, you want to be to work smart. Of course, you would be maximally efficient. But in order
to discover the efficient path, like we're talking about with the short program. Yeah.
Well, the smart, hard thing isn't an either or. It's an and. It's an and, yeah. Right. And
the people who say you should work smart, not hard, they pretty much always fail.
Yeah. Thank you. Right. I mean, that's just a recipe for disaster. I mean, there are
counter examples. But they're more people who benefited from luck.
And you're saying, yeah, exactly. Luck and timing, like you said, is often an essential
thing. But you're saying, you know, you can be, you can push people to work hard and do incredible
work without, without. Without being nasty. Yeah. Without being nasty. I think
Google is a good example of the leadership of Google throughout its history has been
a pretty good example of not being nasty and being kind. Yeah. I mean, the twins, Larry and Sergei
are both pretty nice people. Sander Pichaz, very nice. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, it's a cultural
of people who work really, really hard. Let me ask maybe a little bit of a tense question. We're
talking about Emacs. It seems like you've done some incredible work. So outside of Java, you've
done some incredible work that didn't become as popular as it could have because of like licensing
issues and open source and like issues. What are your thoughts about the, that entire mess?
Like what's about open source now in retrospect, looking back about licensing, about open sourcing,
do you think open source is a good thing, a bad thing? Do you have regrets? Do you have wisdom
that you've learned from that whole experience? So in general, I'm a big fan of open source.
The way that it can be used to build communities and promote the development of things and promote
collaboration and all of that is really pretty grand. When open source turns into a religion
that says all things must be open source, I get kind of weird about that because it's sort of
like saying some versions of that end up saying that all software engineers must
take about poverty. It's unethical to have money to build a company to write.
There's a slice of me that actually buys into that because people who make billions of dollars
off of a patent and the patent came from literally a stroke of lightning that hits you as you lie
half awake in bed. That's lucky. Good for you. The way that that sometimes
sort of explodes into something that looks to me a lot like exploitation. You see a lot of
that in the drug industry. When you've got medications that cost you like $100 a day
and it's like no. The interesting thing about the sort of open source,
what bothers me is when something is not open source and because of that, it's a worse product.
If I look at your just implementation of Emacs, that could have been the dominant
implementation. I use Emacs. That's my main ID. I apologize to the world, but I still love it.
I could have been using your implementation of Emacs and why aren't I?
Are you using the GNU Emacs? I guess the default on Linux. Is that GNU?
Yeah. That through a strange passage started out as the one that I wrote.
Exactly. Part of that was because in the last couple of years of grad school,
it became really clear to me that I was either going to be Mr. Emacs forever
or I was going to graduate. I couldn't actually do both.
Was that a hard decision? That's so interesting to think about you as a
partner. It's a different trajectory that could have happened. That's fascinating.
Maybe I could be fabulously wealthy today if I had become Mr. Emacs and
Emacs had mushroomed into a series of text processing applications and all kinds of stuff.
I have a long history of financially suboptimal decisions because I didn't want that life.
I went to grad school because I wanted to graduate.
Being Mr. Emacs for a while was fun and then it became not fun.
When it was not fun, there was no way I could pay my rent.
I was like, okay, do I carry on as a grad student? I had a research assistantship and
I was living off of that. I was doing all my RA, being grad student work and being Mr. Emacs all
at the same time. I decided to pick one. One of the things that I did at the time was I went
around all the people I knew on the ARPANET who might be able to take over looking after Emacs.
Pretty much everybody said, I got a day job. I actually found two folks and a couple of folks
in a garage in New Jersey, complete with a dog, who were willing to take it over,
but they were going to have to charge money. My deal with them was that they would
make it free for universities and schools and stuff. They said, sure. That upset some people.
Now, I don't know the full history of this, but I think it's interesting. You have some
tension with Mr. Richard Stallman. He represents this kind of, like you mentioned, free software,
sort of a dogmatic focus on all information must be free.
Is there an interesting way to paint a picture of the disagreement you have with Richard through
the years? My basic opposition is that when you say information must be free, to a really
extreme form that turns into all people whose job is the production of
everything from movies to software, they must all take a vow of poverty,
because information must be free. That doesn't work for me. I don't want to be wildly rich.
I am not wildly rich. I do okay, but I can feed my children.
Yeah, I totally agree with you. It does just make me sad that sometimes the closing of the source,
for some reason, the bureaucracy begins to build and sometimes it hurts the product.
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. It's always sad.
And there is a balance in there. It's not hard over rapacious capitalism,
and it's not hard over in the other direction. A lot of the open source movement,
they have been managing to find a path to actually making money. So doing things like
services and support works for a lot of people. And there are some ways where it's kind of,
some of them are a little perverse. So as a part of things like this Sarbanes Oxley Act and
various people's interpretations of all kinds of accounting principles, and this is kind of a
worldwide thing, but if you've got a corporation that is depending on some piece of software,
the often various accounting and reporting standards say, if you don't have a support
contract on this thing that your business is depending on, then that's bad. So if you've got
a database, you need to pay for support. But there's a difference between the support contracts that
the average open source database producer charges and what somebody who is truly rapacious
like Oracle charges. It is absolutely a balance. And there are a lot of different ways
to make the math work out for everybody. And the very unbalanced sort of,
like the winner takes all thing that happens in so much of modern commerce,
that just doesn't work for me either. I know you've talked about this
in quite a few places, but you have created one of the most popular programming languages in the
world. So there's a programming language that I first learned about object oriented programming
with. I think it's a programming language that a lot of people use in a lot of different places
and millions of devices today, Java. So the absurd question, but can you tell the origin
story of Java? So a long time ago, it's on in about 1990, there was a group of us who
were kind of worried that there was stuff going on in the universe of computing that the computing
industry was missing out on. And so a few of us started this project at Sun. We started talking
about it in 1990, and it really got going in 91. And it was all about what was happening
in terms of computing hardware processors and networking and all of that that was
outside of the computer industry. And that was everything from the early glimmers of cell phones
that were happening then to you look at elevators and locomotives and process control systems and
factories and all kinds of audio equipment and video equipment. They all had processors in them,
and they were all doing stuff with them. And it sort of felt like there was something going on
there that we needed to understand. So C and C++ was in the air already?
Oh no, C and C++ absolutely owned the universe at that time. Everything was written in C and C++.
So where was the hunch that there was a need for a revolution?
Well, so the need for a revolution was not about a language. It was just as simple and vague as
there are things happening out there. We need to understand them.
We need to understand them. And so a few of us went on several somewhat epic road trips.
Literal road trips?
Literal road trips. It's like get on an airplane, go to Japan, visit Toshiba and Sharp and Mitsubishi
and Sony and all of these folks. And because we worked for Sun, we had folks who were willing to
give us introductions. We visited Samsung and a bunch of Korean companies, and we went
all over Europe, went to places like Phillips and Siemens and Thompson.
What did you see there?
For me, one of the things that sort of leapt out was that they were doing all the usual computer
things that people had been doing like 20 years before. The thing that really leapt out to me
was that they were sort of reinventing computer networking, and they were making all the mistakes
that people in the computer industry had made. And since I'd been doing a lot of work in the
networking area, we'd go and visit Company X, they'd describe this networking thing that they
were doing. And just without any thought, I could tell them like the 25 things that were going to
be complete disasters with that thing that they were doing. And I don't know whether that had
any impact on any of them, but that particular story of repeating the disasters of the computer
science industry was there. And one of the things we thought was, well, maybe we could do something
useful here with bringing them forward somewhat. But also, at the same time, we learned a bunch of
things from these mostly consumer electronics companies. And high on the list was that
they viewed their relationship with the customer as sacred. They were never ever
willing to make tradeoffs for safety. So, one of the things that had always made me nervous in the
computer industry was that people were willing to make tradeoffs in reliability to get performance.
They want faster and faster. It breaks a little more often because it's faster. Maybe you run it
a little hotter than you should. The one that always blew my mind was the way that
the folks at Cray Supercomputers got their division to be really fast,
was that they did Newton Raphson approximations. And so, the bottom several bits of A over B
were essentially random numbers. What could possibly go wrong?
What could go wrong? And just figuring out how to nail the bottom bit, how to make sure that
if you put a piece of toast in a toaster, it's not going to kill the customer.
It's not going to burst into flames and burn the house down.
So, I guess those are the principles that were inspiring. But how did, from the days of
Java is called oak because of a tree outside the window story that a lot of people know,
how did it become this incredible powerful language?
Well, so, it was a bunch of things. After all that, we started,
you know, the way that we decided that we could understand things better
was by building a demo, building a prototype of something. So, kind of because it was easy
and fun, we decided to build a control system for some home electronics, you know, TV, VCO,
that kind of stuff. And as we were building it, we sort of discovered that there were some
things about standard practice in C programming that were really getting in the way. And it
wasn't exactly, you know, because we were writing all this C code and C++ code that
we couldn't write it to do the right thing, but that one of the things that was weird in the
group was that we had a guy whose, you know, his sort of top level job was, he was a business guy.
You know, he was sort of an MBA kind of person, you know, think about business plans and all of
that. And, you know, there were a bunch of things that were kind of, you know, and we would talk
about things that were going wrong and other things that were going wrong, things that were
going right. And, you know, as we thought about, you know, things like the requirements for
security and safety, some low level details in C like naked pointers. And, you know, so back in
the early 90s, it was well understood that, you know, the number one source of like security
vulnerabilities was just pointers was just bugs. Yeah. Right. And it was like, you know, 50, 60,
70% of all security vulnerabilities were bugs. And the vast majority of them were like buffer
overflows. So you're like, we have to fix this. We have to make sure that this cannot happen.
And that was kind of the original thing for me was this cannot, this cannot continue.
And one of the things I find really entertaining this year was I forget which
rag published it, but there was this article that came out that was an examination, it was sort of
the result of an examination of all the security vulnerabilities in Chrome. And Chrome is like a
giant piece of C++ code. And 60 or 70% of all the security vulnerabilities were stupid pointer
tricks. And I thought, it's 30 years later. And we're still there. And we're still there.
And, you know, that's one of those, you know, slap your forehead and just want to cry.
So would you attribute or is that too much of a simplification, but would you attribute the
creation of Java to C pointers? Obvious problem. Well, I mean, that was one of the trigger points.
Concurrency you've mentioned. Concurrency was a big deal.
Because when you're interacting with people, the last thing you ever want to see is the thing like
waiting. And, you know, issues about the software development process, you know, when
faults happen, can you recover from them? What can you do to make it easier to create and eliminate
complex data structures? What can you do to fix, you know, one of the most common C problems,
which is storage leaks. And it's evil twin, the freed but still being used piece of memory,
you know, you free something and then you keep using it.
Oh, yeah. You know, so when I was originally thinking about that, I was thinking about that in
terms of sort of safety and security issues. And one of the things I sort of came to believe,
came to understand was that it wasn't just about safety and security, but it was about
developer velocity. And I got really religious about this because at that point,
I had spent an ungodly amount of my life hunting down mystery pointer bugs.
Yeah. And, you know, like two thirds of my time as a software developer was, you know,
because the mystery pointer bugs tend to be the hardest to find because they tend to be
very, very statistical. The ones that hurt, you know, they're like a one in a million chance.
But nevertheless, create an infinite amount of suffering.
Right. Because when you're doing a billion operations a second, you know,
a one in a million chance means it's going to happen. And so I got really religious about
this thing about, you know, making it so that if something fails, it fails immediately and
visibly. And, you know, one of the things that was a real attraction of Java to lots of development
shops was that, you know, we get our code up and running twice as fast.
You mean like the entirety of the development process, the bugging, all that kind of stuff?
Yeah. So if you measure time from, you know, you first touch fingers to keyboard until you get
your first demo out, not much different. But if you look from fingers touching keyboard to solid
piece of software that you could release in production, it would be way faster.
And I think what people don't often realize is, yeah, there's things that really slow you down.
Like the hard to catch bugs probably is the thing that really slows down that.
It really slows things down. But also there were, you know, one of the things that you get out of
object oriented programming is a strict methodology about, you know, what are the interfaces
between things and being really clear about how parts relate to each other. And what that
helps with is so many times what people do is they kind of like sneak around the side.
So if you've built something and people are using it and you say, well, okay, you know,
I've built this thing, you use it this way. And then you change it in such a way that it still
does what you said it does. It just does it a little bit different. But then you find out
that somebody out there was sneaking around the side. They had sort of tunneled in a back door
and this person, their code broke. And because they were sneaking through a side door.
And normally the altitude is dummy. But a lot of times, you know, you can't get away,
you can't just slap their hand and tell them to not do that because, you know, it's, you know,
somebody's, you know, some bank's, you know, account reconciliation system that, you know,
some developer decided, oh, I'm lazy, you know, I'll just sneak through the back door.
And because the language allows it, I mean, you can't even mad at them.
And so one of the things I did that on the one hand upset a bunch of people was that I made it so
that you really couldn't go through back doors, right? So the whole point of that was to say,
if you need, you know, if the interface here isn't right, the wrong way to deal with that
is to go through a back door. The right way to deal with it is to walk up to the developer of
this thing and say, uh, fix it. Right. And so it was kind of like a social engineering thing.
Yeah. And people ended up discovering that that really made a difference
in terms of, you know, and a bunch of this stuff, you know, if you're just like screwing around
right in your own, like, you know, class project scale stuff, a lot of stuff isn't quite so,
so important because, you know, you're, you know, both sides of the interface. But, you know, when
you're building, you know, sort of larger, more complex pieces of software that have a lot of
people working on them, and especially when they like span organizations,
you know, having, having really clear, having clarity about how that gets structured
saves your life. Yeah. And, you know, especially, you know, there's so much software that is
fundamentally untestable, you know, until you do the real thing. Right.
It's better to write good code in the beginning as opposed to writing crappy code and then trying
to fix it and trying to scramble and figure out and through testing figure out where the bugs are.
Yeah. It's like, it's like, it's like, which shortcut caused that
rocket to not get where it was needed to go? So, I think one of the most beautiful ideas
philosophically and technically is of a virtual machine, the Java virtual machine.
Well, again, I apologize to romanticize things, but how did the idea of the JVM come to be?
How do you radical of an idea it is? Because it seems to me to be just a really interesting
idea in the history of programming. So, and what is it? So, the Java virtual machine,
I mean, you can think of it in different ways because it was carefully designed to have
different ways of viewing it. So, one view of it that most people don't really realize is there
is that you can view it as sort of an encoding of the abstract syntax tree in reverse Polish
notation. I don't know if that makes any sense at all. I could explain it and that would blow
all over time. But the other way to think of it and the way that it ends up being explained is that
it's like the instruction set of an abstract machine that's designed such that you can
translate that abstract machine to a physical machine. And the reason that that's important,
so if you wind back to the early 90s when we were talking to all of these companies doing
consumer electronics, and you talk to the purchasing people,
there were interesting conversations with purchasing.
So, if you look at how these devices come together, they're sheet metal and gears and
circuit boards and capacitors and resistors and stuff. And everything you buy has multiple sources.
So, you can buy a capacitor from here, you can buy a capacitor from there,
and you've got kind of a market so that you can actually get a decent price for a capacitor.
But CPUs and particularly in the early 90s, CPUs were all different and all proprietary.
So, if you use the chip from Intel, you had to be an Intel customer till the end of time.
Because if you wrote a bunch of software, when you wrote software using whatever technique you
wanted and C was particularly bad about this because there was a lot of properties of the
underlying machine that came through. So, the code you wrote, you were stuck to
that particular machine. You were stuck to that particular machine,
which meant that they couldn't decide, Intel is screwing us. I'll start buying chips from
Bob's Better Chips. This drove the purchasing people absolutely insane
that they were welded into this decision. And they would have to make this decision
before the first line of software was written. That's funny that you were talking about the
purchasing people. So, there's one perspective, right? There's a lot of other perspectives
that all probably hated this idea. But from a technical aspect, just the creation of an
abstraction layer that's agnostic to the underlying machine from the perspective of the
developer is brilliant. So, that's across the spectrum of providers of chips.
But then there's also the time thing because as you went from one generation to the next generation
to the next generation, they were all different. And you would often have to rewrite your software.
I mean, generations of machines of different kinds.
Yeah. So, one of the things that sucked about a year out of my life was when
Son went from the Motorola 68010 processor to the 68020 processor,
then they had a number of differences. And one of them hit us really hard. And I ended up being
the point guy on the worst case of where the new instruction cache architecture heard us.
Well, okay. So, I mean, one of this idea, I mean, okay. So, yeah, you articulate a really clear
fundamental problem in all of computing. But where do you get the guts to think we can actually solve
this? In our conversations with all these vendors, these problems started to show up.
And I kind of had this epiphany because it reminded me of a summer job that I had had in grad school.
So, back in grad school, my thesis advisor, well, I had two thesis advisors for bizarre reasons.
One of them was a guy named Raj Reddy. The other one was Bob Sproul. And Raj, I love Raj,
I really love both of them. So, the department had bought a bunch of early workstations
from a company called Three Rivers Computer Company. And Three Rivers Computer Company was
a bunch of electrical engineers who wanted to do as little software as possible. So,
they knew that they'd need to have like compilers and OS and stuff like that. And they didn't want
to do any of that. And they wanted to do that for as close to zero money as possible. So, what
they did was they built a machine whose instruction set was literally the bytecode for UCSD Pascal,
the P code. And so, we had a bunch of software that was written for this machine.
And for various reasons, the company wasn't doing terrifically well. We had all this software on
these machines and we wanted it to run on other machines, principally the Vax. And so, Raj asked
me if I could come up with a way to port all of this software from the perk machines to Vaxes.
And I think what he had in mind was something that would translate from Pascal to C or Pascal to
actually at those times, pretty much, you could translate to C or C. And if you didn't like translate
to C, you could translate to C. There was, it's like the Henry Ford, any color you want,
just as long as it's black. And I went, that's really hard. And I noticed that when I was like
looking at stuff and I went, ooh, I bet I could rewrite the P code into Vax assembly code.
And then I started to realize that, you know, there were some properties of P code that made
that really easy, some properties that made it really hard. So, I ended up writing this thing
that translated from P code on the three rivers perks into assembly code on the Vax.
And I actually got higher quality code than the C compiler. And so, everything just got really fast.
It was really easy. It was like, wow, I thought that was a sleazy hack because I was lazy.
And in actual fact, it worked really well. And I tried to convince people that that was maybe a
good thesis topic. And nobody was, you know, it was like, nah.
Really? I mean, it's kind of a brilliant idea, right? Maybe you didn't have the,
you weren't able to articulate the big picture of it.
Yeah. And I think, you know, that was a key part. But so then, you know, clock comes forward a few
years. And it's like, we've got to be able to, you know, if they want to be able to switch from,
you know, this weird microprocessor to that weird and totally different microprocessor,
how do you do that? And I kind of went, oh, maybe by doing something kind of in the space of,
you know, Pascal P code, you know, I could do like multiple translators.
And I spent some time thinking about that and thinking about, you know, what worked and what
didn't work when I did the P code to Vax translator. And I talked to some of the folks
who were involved in small talk, because small talk also did a bytecode. And then I kind of went,
yeah, I want to do that. Because that actually, you know, and it had the other advantage that
you could either interpret it or compile it. And interpreters are usually easier to do,
but not as fast as a compiler. So I figured, good, I can be lazy again. You know, sometimes I think
that most of my good ideas are driven by laziness. And often I find that people, some of people's
stupidest ideas are because they're insufficiently lazy. They just want to build something really
complicated. It's like, doesn't need to be that complicated. Yeah. And so that's how that came
out. And, you know, but that also turned into kind of a, you know, almost a religious position on
my part, which was, which got me in several other fights. So like one of the things that was a real
difference was the way that arithmetic worked. You know, once upon a time, it wasn't always just
two's complement arithmetic. There were some machines that had one's complement arithmetic,
which was like almost anything built by CDC. And occasionally there were machines that were
decimal arithmetic. And I was like, this is crazy. You know, pretty much two's complement
integer arithmetic has won. So just, let's just do that. Just do that. One of the other places
where there was a lot of variability was in the way that floating point behaved.
And that was causing people throughout the software industry much pain because you couldn't
do a numerical computing library that would work on CDC and then have it work on an IBM machine
and work on a deck machine. And as a part of that whole struggle, there had been this
this big body of work on floating point standards. And this thing emerged that came to be called
IEEE 754, which is the floating point standard that pretty much has taken over the entire universe.
And at the time I was doing Java, it had pretty much completed taking over the universe.
There were still a few pockets of holdouts, but I was like, it's important to be able to say what
2 plus 2 means. And so I went that. And one of the ways that I got into fights with people was that
there were a few machines that did not implement IEEE 754 correctly.
Of course, that's all short term kind of fights. I think in the long term, I think this vision
is one out. Yeah. And I think it's, you know, and it worked out over time. I mean, the biggest
fights were with Intel because they had done some strange things with rounding. They had
done some strange things with their transcendental functions, which turned into a mushroom cloud
of weirdness. And the name, in the name of optimization, but from the perspective of the
developer, that's not good. Well, their issues with transcendental functions were just stupid.
Okay. So that's not even a trade off. That's just absolutely.
Yeah. They were doing range reduction for sine and cosine.
A lot. Okay. Using a slightly wrong value for pi.
Got it. Go ahead, 10 minutes. So in the interest of time,
two questions. So one about Android and one about life.
So one, I mean, we could talk for many more hours. I hope eventually we might talk again.
But I got to ask you about Android and the use of Java there because it's one of the many places
where Java just has a huge impact on this world. Just on your opinion, is there things that make
you happy about the way Java is used in the Android world? And are there things that you wish were
different? I don't know how to do a short answer to that. But I have to do a short answer to that.
So I'm happy that they did it. Java had been running on cell phones at that time for quite
a few years and it worked really, really well. There were things about how they did it and in
particular various ways that they kind of violated all kinds of contracts. The guy who led it,
Andy Rubin, he crossed a lot of lines. There's some lines crossed.
Yeah, lines were crossed that have since mushroomed into giant court cases.
And they didn't need to do that. And in fact, it would have been so much cheaper for them to not
cross lines. I suppose they didn't anticipate the success of this whole endeavor. Or do you think
at that time it was already clear that this is going to blow up? I guess I sort of came to
believe that it didn't matter what Andy did, it was going to blow up. I kind of started to think
of him as like a manufacturer of bombs. Yeah, some of the best things in this world come about.
They're a little bit of explosive. Well, and some of the worst.
And some of the worst, beautifully put. But is there, and like you said, I mean,
does that make you proud that the Java is in millions? I mean, it could be billions of devices.
Yeah. Well, I mean, it was in billions of phones before Android came along.
And I'm just as proud of the way that the smart card standards
adopted Java. And they did it. Everybody involved in that did a really good job.
And that's billions and billions. That's crazy. The SIM cards in your pocket.
Yeah, I mean, I've been outside of that world for a decade. So I don't know how that has evolved,
but it's just been crazy. So on that topic, let me ask, again,
there's a million technical things we could talk about. But let me ask the absurd,
the old philosophical question about life. What do you hope when you look back at your life and
people talk about you, write about you 500 years from now? What do you hope your legacy is?
People not being afraid to take a leap of faith. I mean, I've got this
kind of weird history of doing weird stuff. It worked out pretty damn well.
It worked out. And I think some of the weirder stuff that I've done
has been the coolest. And some of it crashed and burned. And I think well over half of the
stuff that I've done has crashed and burned, which has occasionally been really annoying.
But still you kept doing it.
But yeah. And even when things crash and burn, you at least learn something from it.
By way of advice, people, developers, engineers, scientists, or just people who are young
to look up to you, what advice would you give them? How to approach their life?
Don't be afraid of risk. It's okay to do stupid things once.
Maybe about a couple of times.
You get a pass on the first time or two that you do something stupid.
The third or fourth time, yeah, not so much.
But also, I don't know why, but really early on, I started to think about
ethical choices in my life. And because I'm a big science fiction fan,
I got to thinking about just about every technical decision I make
in terms of, are you building Blade Runner or Star Trek?
Which one's better?
Which future would you rather live in?
So what's the answer to that?
Well, I would rather live in the universe of Star Trek.
Star Trek, yeah. That opens up a whole topic about AI, but that's a really interesting idea.
So your favorite AI system would be data from Star Trek.
And my least favorite would easily be Skynet.
Beautifully put, I don't think there's a better way to end it, James.
I can't say enough how much of an honor it is to meet you, to talk to you.
Thanks so much for wasting your time with me today.
Not a waste at all.
Thanks, James.
All right, thanks.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with James Gosling and thank you to our sponsors,
Public Goods, BetterHelp and ExpressVPN. Please check out these sponsors in the
description to get a discount and to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing,
subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars on Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify,
support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now, let me leave you with some words from James Gosling.
One of the toughest things about life is making choices.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.